OSSM-8507 Migration guide for multitenant 2.6 (#86917)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/ossm-migrating-multitenant-without-cert-manager.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * service-mesh-docs-main/about/ossm-migrating-migration-guides-assembly.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="migrating-multitenant-without-cert-manager_{context}""]
== Migrating a multitenant deployment without cert-manager

.Prerequisites

* You have deployed a cluster on {ocp-product-title} 4.14 or later.
* You are logged in to the {ocp-product-title} web console as a user with the cluster-admin role.
* You have completed the premigration checklists.
* You have the {SMProduct} {SMv2Version} Operator installed.
* You have the {SMProduct} 3 Operator installed.
* You have `IstioCNI` installed.
* You have `istioctl` installed.

> * You are not using the cert-manager tool.

Reviewer: In line with my comments above, I think we should assume that they are not using cert-manager here and leave this off.

* You are running a `MultiTenant` `ServiceMeshControlPlane`.

.Procedure

The `bookinfo` example application is being used for demonstration purposes. You can follow these same steps with your own workloads.

. Create your `Istio` resource.
+
.Example `Istio` resource
+
[source,yaml]
----
   apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1alpha1
   kind: Istio
   metadata:
     name: istio-tenant-a
   spec:
     namespace: istio-system-tenant-a <1>

>      version: v1.23.0

Reviewer: Again a version variable would help keep things up to date

     values:
       meshConfig:
         discoverySelectors: <2>
           - matchLabels:
               tenant: tenant-a
   #     extensionProviders:  <3>
   #       - name: prometheus
   #         prometheus: {}
   #       - name: otel
   #         opentelemetry:
   #           port: 4317
   #           service: otel-collector.opentelemetrycollector-3.svc.cluster.local
----
+
<1> The `spec.namespace` field in your `Istio` resource must be the **same** namespace as your `ServiceMeshControlPlane`. If you set the `spec.namespace` field in your `Istio` resource to a different namespace than your `ServiceMeshControlPlane`, the migration will not work properly.
<2> controlplanes by default watch the entire cluster and when managing multiple controlplanes on a single cluster, you must narrow the scope of each controlplane by setting `discoverySelectors`. In this example, we use the label `tenant` but you can use any label or combination of labels that you choose.
<3> If you are migrating metrics and tracing, uncomment and update the `extensionProviders` fields according to your tracing and metrics configurations.

> . Add your `tenant` label to each one of your dataplane namespaces by running the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Add your `tenant` label to each one of your dataplane namespaces by running the following command for each dataplane namespace:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc label ns bookinfo tenant=tenant-a
----
+
[NOTE]
====

> With {SMProduct} 2.6, namespaces were enrolled into the mesh by adding them to the `Service MeshMemberRoll` resource. In {SMProduct} 3, you must label each one of your dataplane namespaces with the `discoverySelectors.matchLabels` label.

Reviewer: You can also use `discoverySelectors.matchExpressions`

```suggestion
With {SMProduct} 2.6, namespaces were enrolled into the mesh by adding them to the `Service MeshMemberRoll` resource. In {SMProduct} 3, you must label each one of your dataplane namespaces to match your `discoverySelectors`.
```

====

=== Migrating workloads

Now you can migrate your workloads from the {SMProduct} 2.6 controlplane to the {SMproduct} 3.0 controlplane.

[NOTE]
====
You can migrate workloads and gateways separately.
====

. Find the current `IstioRevision` for your {SMProduct} 3.0 controlplane by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get istios istio-tenant-a
NAME             REVISIONS   READY   IN USE   ACTIVE REVISION   STATUS    VERSION   AGE

> istio-tenant-a   1           1       0        istio-tenant-a    Healthy   v1.24.1   30s

Reviewer: ```suggestion
istio-tenant-a   1           1       0        istio-tenant-a    Healthy   v1.24.3   30s
```

----
+
[NOTE]
====
The naming format of your revisions depends on which upgrade strategy you choose for your `Istio` instance.
====

. Copy the `ACTIVE REVISION` to use as your `istio.io/rev` label in the next step.

. Update injection labels on the `dataplane` namespace by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc label ns bookinfo istio.io/rev=istio-tenant-a maistra.io/ignore-namespace="true" --overwrite=true
----
+
This adds the following labels to the namespace:
+
.. The `istio.io/rev: istio-tenant-a` label: Ensures that any new pods that get created in that namespace connect to the {SMProduct} 3.0 proxy.
+

> .. The `maistra.io/ignore-namespace: "true"` label: Disables sidecar injection for {SMProduct} 2.6 proxies in the namespace so that {SMProduct} 2.6 stops injecting proxies in this namespace, and any new proxies are injected by the {SMProduct} 3.0 `controlplane`. Without this label, the {SMProduct} 2.6 injection webhook tries to inject the pod and it will connect to the {SMProduct} 2.6 proxy as well as refuse to start. This happens because the injection webhook has the {SMProduct} 2.6 Carrier Infrastructure Network (CNI) annotation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. The `maistra.io/ignore-namespace: "true"` label: Disables sidecar injection for {SMProduct} 2.6 proxies in the namespace so {SMProduct} 2.6 stops injecting proxies in this namespace, and any new proxies are injected by {SMProduct} 3.0. Without this label, the {SMProduct} 2.6 injection webhook tries to inject the pod and the injected sidecar proxy will refuse to start since it will have both the {SMProduct} 2.6 and the {SMProduct} 3.0 Container Network Interface(CNI) annotations.
```

+
[NOTE]
====
Once you apply the `maistra.io/ignore-namespace` label, any new pod that gets created in the namespace will connect to the {SMProduct} 3.0 proxy. Workloads can still communicate with each other regardless of which controlplane they are connected to.
====

> . Use the `curl` command for the `productpage` pod in `bookinfo` application to ensure proxies can still communicate with one another by running the following command:
> +
> [source,terminal]
> ----
> $ oc exec -it -n bookinfo deployments/productpage-v1 -c istio-proxy -- curl localhost:9080/productpage
> ----

Reviewer: Again this step is not necessary
```suggestion
```

. Restart the workloads:
+

> .. You can restart the workloads all at once so that the new pod will be injected with the {SMProduct} 3.0 proxy by running the follow command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. You can restart all the workloads at once so that the new pods will be injected with the {SMProduct} 3.0 proxy. For this example with bookinfo, run the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc rollout restart deployments -n bookinfo
----

.. Alternatively, you can restart each workload individually by running the following command for each workload:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc rollout restart deployments productpage-v1 -n bookinfo
----

. Wait for the `productpage` application to restart by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc rollout status deployment productpage-v1 -n bookinfo
----

=== Validate Workload Migration

> . Ensure the `productpage` application is connected to the new controlplane.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Check that your workload is connected to the new controlplane.
```

   ratings-v1-d6f449f59-9rds2.bookinfo               Kubernetes     SYNCED     SYNCED     SYNCED     SYNCED       NOT SENT     istiod-basic-6c9f8d9894-sh6lx     1.20.8
   reviews-v1-686cd989df-9x59z.bookinfo              Kubernetes     SYNCED     SYNCED     SYNCED     SYNCED       NOT SENT     istiod-basic-6c9f8d9894-sh6lx     1.20.8
   reviews-v2-785b8b48fc-l7xkj.bookinfo              Kubernetes     SYNCED     SYNCED     SYNCED     SYNCED       NOT SENT     istiod-basic-6c9f8d9894-sh6lx     1.20.8
   reviews-v3-67889ffd49-7bhxn.bookinfo              Kubernetes     SYNCED     SYNCED     SYNCED     SYNCED       NOT SENT     istiod-basic-6c9f8d9894-sh6lx     1.20.8
----

.. Check which proxies have been migrated to the new {SMProduct} 3.0 controlplane by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
istioctl ps --istioNamespace istio-system-tenant-a --revision istio-tenant-a
----
+
.Example output
+
[source, terminal]
----
NAME                                         CLUSTER        CDS        LDS        EDS        RDS        ECDS     ISTIOD                      VERSION

> productpage-v1-7745c5cc94-wpvth.bookinfo     Kubernetes     SYNCED     SYNCED     SYNCED     SYNCED              istiod-5bbf98dccf-n8566     1.23.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
productpage-v1-7745c5cc94-wpvth.bookinfo     Kubernetes     SYNCED     SYNCED     SYNCED     SYNCED              istiod-5bbf98dccf-n8566     1.24.3
```
